In the previous segment, we saw that
the Schrodinger equation for an infinite
potential, well, without even writing
down the Schrodinger equation itself.
So, of course,
it doesn't always happen this way so for
a more complicated potentials we actually
have to do some calculations and
in this segment I'm going to present
an example of a general method, actually,
that is used to solve
the Schrödinger equation and
I would consider a so-called
finite potential.
Well, so the potential that we're actually
going to study is illustrated here,
so here is a formal sort of
mathematical expression for
this potential and
this is the, its illustration.
So for x, so
this is one dimensional potential for
x greater than a/2 or smaller than- a/2,
we have a finite wall if you
want with a height of u naught,
and in between- a/2 and a/2,
we have potential well.
And so the question that we're going to
be interested in is whether or
not we have energy levels,
allowed states within the potential well,
which implies that the energy of these
states must be smaller than this maximum,
u naught, but larger than 0.
So these are positive energies
here in this formulation.
Now, clearly we have three regions
that appear in this potential.
So one region will be to
the left of the point,- a/2.
The second region, which is the potential
well itself, will be between -a/2 and
a/2 and the third region is x>a/2.
And for each of the regions,
we can write down the corresponding
Schrödinger equation, let's say,
for regions the 1 and 3 for
absolute x>a/2 we have the kinetic
energy + the potential energy U
naught = energy that we're actually
looking for, E times psi (x).
And for the region of the potential,
well, we'll formally
have just the free Schrodinger equation,
since the potential here is equal to zero.
Now, to solve this Schrodinger equation,
the main challenge in some sense of
solving the Schrodinger equation
is actually would be to match
the solutions in different regions.
And by match, I mean the following.
We are going to demand that both
the wave function itself and
its first derivative
are continuous everywhere.
In particular in these matching points,
-a/2 and
a/2, and so
here I've formally represented as so.
So +0 basically means to
the right of a certain point and
-0 means to the left of a certain point.
And the reason we want our wave function
or let's say is derivative to be
continues, is because if we do not have
this continuity, let's say in this point,
if we let's say solve our Schrodinger
equation in region three and in region
two, and depending I don't bother to
measure them, then in general so our wave
function, in this case, is going to
be something like this, let's say.
And there will be a jump, a final jump in
the wave function or in this derivative.
And if we calculate the second derivative,
here,
due to the jump, we're going to
have an infinite second derivative,
which wouldn't be able to compensate
in our Schrödinger equation.
So there will be essentially a delta
function coming up from this
discontinuity, and, well,
we don't have it in our problem.
In our problem,
we don't have a delta function.
So therefore,
we must demand that the wave function and
its derivatives are continuous everywhere.
And it turns out that this,
along with this condition, would be
enough to find the constraints which
will determine the actual energy levels.
So, now the electric constraint,
namely that the wave function should decay
at infinity is essentially
physically meaningful constraint,
so we were looking for
bound state of our particle.
So we want the probability of finding
this particle at infinity to be 0.
And we want the probability to be
sort of localized in the vicinity of
the potential well and so this is where
the second constraint is coming from.
Now to simplify this equation,
we could just notice that,
well, we can rewrite it, let's say,
the first one we can introduce
a new parameter, gamma,
which is 2m over h squared,
(U naught- epsilon,- E).
And so
let me actually call it gamma squared.
And well, we can just put the energy
in the left-hand side and
multiply everything by -2m/h squared, and
this would give rise to
the following equation,
psi 2 primes- gamma squared = 0.
So the second equation,
we can introduce a parameter,
let's say, k and
we are going to have this with
psi + k square root of psi = 0.
So let me just rewrite it
in a slightly nicer way.
So here are the basically the two
equations I just wrote, and
here are the parameters.
Both these equations, actually,
very simple equations.
So this one has a solutions,
either the power plus, minus gamma x.
You can just plug it in and see
the the derivative of the exponential and
the exponential is
the exponential itself and,
well, clearly is going to
satisfy this equation.
And the second equation, well,
is just the three Schrodinger equation,
unsurprisingly, gives us just
plain waves as the solution,
either applying plus minus pi K times x.
So and again, the challenge is going to
be to match those guys in each of these
points, -a/2 and a/2.
Now it's not really necessary for
the solution of the problem, but
I would like to use the symmetry
of the problem here, and
this would give me an excuse in some
sense to introduce the symmetry concepts
in quantum mechanics in
a much broader context.
So namely, I would like to
point out the following fact.
If the Hamiltonian commutes with an
operator, A, this can be an operator for
any physical quantity, then the solutions
to the Schrodinger equation,
that is, an equation which is
an eigenvalue problem for the Hamiltonian.
So then these solutions can also be
chosen to have definite value of E,
which means that the same solutions
are going to be the eigenstates
of the eigenvalue problem for
this operator A, whatever it is.
So in general, if the two operators were
not to commute, so I wouldn't necessarily
have been able to find such a set of wave
function which would have both A and
E, the energy, definite.
So but in the presence of such a symmetry,
if you want this possibility exists.
Now what does this have
to do with our problem?
So in our problem, we have a sort
of rather obvious symmetry which
is essentially inversion
symmetry of the potentials.
If we flip x, x goes to- x, so
the potential is unchanged.
And so
the kinetic energy also doesn't change, so
it's just a second derivative
with respect to x.
So therefore the Hamiltonian,
one can check,
that the Hamiltonian is indeed symmetric
or invariant under this operation.
And so operator that actually enforces
this inversion is this operator,
I, which basically takes x to minus x,
and this operator has two eigenvalues,
the parities,
which are either plus or minus one.
So, the functions which are eigenfunctions
of this inversion operator
are either even or
odd function of the coordinate.
And so, what are saying in this very
complicated language is that we can
find the Eigen states of our problem,
the solution to the Schrodinger equation,
which would be either odd or
even functions.
That's all we're saying and, well, another
statement that I would like to make is
that if there is a symmetry in
the problem, you better use it.
So, it always simplifies things and
never it makes things more complicated.
It always simplifies things.
And so
that's what I'm going to do here as well.
So in general,
if I were to ignore this symmetry, so
the solution to the Schrodinger
equations we just discussed in this
region of the well would be an arbitrary
linear combination of two plane waves.
Now I'm saying, so since there is this
symmetry in the problem, so I would like,
instead of just having this
arbitrary coefficient C1 and C2,
I would like to consider separately
solutions with definite parity.
Either even functions,
which is basically cosine with C1 = C2 or
a sine, which is an odd function,
in which case C1 is equal
to a complex conjugate and
these are purely measuring constants.
So in the following,
I'm going to specifically consider
focus on this even solution, just for
simplicity, but you can find the general
analysis in a number of books.
So this is the problem we are solving by
the way is absolutely classical problem.
Classical not in the sense of classical
physics, but in the sense that it appears
in just about every course or
every book on quantum physics.
Now, having determined the solution
we're interested in in region two,
we now have to determine
the solutions in regions one and
three that we're going to be focusing on.
And by the way,
the symmetry of the problem,
we can actually pick just
one of these regions.
So we don't really have to use in
this case both matching points.
We can do, well, just using one point.
And as we discussed, the general
solution to the Schrodinger equation,
to this equation, in the region three
is given by a linear combination of
these two exponentials, which are no
longer oscillating functions but
are functions that are either decaying,
a rapidly decaying function,
or a rapidly growing function.
And so, to simplify, to find the proper
solution in the region three,
let's say, for R > a/2, we have to
recall the constraint at infinity,
namely that the wave
function must remain finite.
Well, actually, I should correct it.
It should actually go to
0 as we go to infinity.
So otherwise if we don't impose this
constraint, if we allow in this case this
term in the wave function, the probability
of a particle to leak in some sense to
infinity would explode exponentially,
which doesn't make any sense.
So therefore, we simply draw up
the B term in this wave function and
only will focus on this wave
function in the region three.
So now we're in a position to
actually match the solutions.
We know the solution in each region.
So here I do present a solution in all
of the regions, including region one.
So this guy is for region one.
This guy is for region two.
And this guy is for region three.
But as I said,
the symmetry, we can focus on one matching
point and this is what I'm going to do.
So now we can write the wave
function to the left at this point,
which is going to be C
times cosine (ka/2) and
it must be equal to the wave function
to the right, which is this guy,
which is A e- gamma a/2.
So this is the first matching condition.
And the second matching condition is going
to be the derivative of this function.
So the derivative of cosine is minus sine,
so we're going to have-
c times k sine (ka/2).
To the left, must be equal to-
A gamma e- gamma a/2 to the right.
And now what I'm going to do, I'm going to
divide so let me call this equation,
equation number 2 and
this going to be equation number 1.
And so if we divide equation
number 2 by equation number 1,
which we're allowed to do, what we're
going to get in the left-hand side
we're going to have k times sine
over cosine is a tangent (ka/2).
And in the right-hand side, so
the minuses will go away and
the exponentials are going to go away,
we're going to get just gamma.
So here I have the same equation
written explicitly in a nicer way.
And also I recall the definitions of gamma
and K, that I made in a previous slide,
so K itself is the square
root of 2mE over A squared,
and the energy is really
what we're looking for.
The energy appears both
in the left-hand side and
in the right-hand side in
a rather nonlinear way.
And as a matter of fact, there is no way,
we cannot solve this
equation analytically.
So this is a nonlinear
algebraic equation and
it doesn't have a formal
sort of closed solution in.
So which, by the way, is quite amazing
that the problem as simple as this finite
potential, well, in one dimensional
quantum mechanics which,
is just about the simplest problem you
can think of, cannot really be solved.
So this tells you something about
the technical complexity of
the Schrödinger equation.
Now, to proceed further towards a bit of
numerical analysis or asymptotic analysis,
it's always a good idea in such
cases to get rid of the physical,
dimensional quantity such as energy or
this potential height,
which have physical dimension, and
move to dimensionless parameters.
And so here the nature of dimensionless
parameters are going to be, well,
basically the argument of this tangent,
which is ka/2 and
the parameter introduced here,
which is basically to be able to
write our equation in a nice and
dimensionless way.
The reason why dealing with dimensionless
quantities is much more convenient than
with quantities that has non-trivial,
physical dimensions is because for
the former, we can talk about
them being large or small.
So, we can say that something is small or
large just comparing it with one.
While, for a dimensional quantity, it does
really make sense to talk about larger.
It's more, unless we specify what we
actually mean by that, for instance,
is one meter large or small?
Well, we don't know unless we compare it
with the, let's say, size of an atom,
in which case it's clearly larger over
the size of universe, in which case,
one meter is really small.
So here, once we get this parameter psi,
it allows us to define basically
a deep and shallow potential.
So we will call the potential deep
if this guy, this k psi squared,
is much larger than 1, and
the potential is going to be called
shallow if it's much smaller than 1.
And by the way, in the following two
video segments, we're going to be
focusing on shallow potentials which
are well modeled by a delta function.
So, naively, you would think that
delta function is something which is
actually very deep because it goes to
infinity if you approach x equals 0.
Let's say if we're talking about potential
u (x) which is, let's say,- u Delta (x).
But, well, delta (x),
the potential of delta(x) is really,
it means to represent potential
with a very small radius and
the radius in order for the integral of
the Delta function to be equal to o1ne.
So the radius of the potential,
the size of the potential should scale
with the depth of the potential as so.
So as a goes to zero, well, u naught
is sort of proportional to one over a.
But here we see that
the definition of a shallow
potential is u naught a squared times
m over a squared must be more than 1,
which means that the delta potential is
actually closer to a shallow potential
which is an important observation
that we will take advantage later of.
But at this stage, let me just say that
while we have these two special cases.
And even though we cannot solve
exactly this equation for
a arbitrary side,
we can do two separate analysis of this
equation in such two special cases,
and here I present these analysis.
So this is, again, the same equation.
So the red tangent of x is plotted here.
So here, basically, I plot the functions
on the left of this equation and
on the right of this equation.
And you see, by the way,
that when x becomes larger than psi,
so this right-hand side becomes
a purely imaginary constant,
which implies that there is definitely
no solution to this equation,
as the tangent here does
not become imaginary.
So it makes sense only to plot this
function for x as smaller than psi.
So, here I have an example of a deep
potential where I say, set psi
to 20 and so I have all these red
curves corresponding to the tangent and
this blue curve corresponds to
the right-hand side, and wherever
I see a crossing between these two guys,
so I see here, here, here, here, etcetera.
So I have a level.
In this case, I can count the number of
levels that are allowed in this quantum.
Well, one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven levels are allowed for
the symmetric wave functions, if psi = 20.
Now let's consider a relatively shallow
potential that is on the other hand, so
let's say with psi = 1.
In this case, I only have to plot these
functions for x is more than 1 and
there is just one crossing between
the blue curve and the red curve,
which means that there is just one
single level in the shallow potential.
Which by the way is a very important
resolve that we're going to confirm on
the case of a one
dimensional delta potential.
And we're going to see how this result
is more defined in higher dimensions.
Now the last comment I'm going to
make is that, and first of all,
I could have continued analysis of this
self-consistency equation and there
is a lot to do to determine the actual
numerical value of the energy levels to
see what happens with the anti-symmetric
levels with the wave functions.
And I'm not going to do it right now
in the lecture because admittedly it's
probably not the most exciting thing
in quantum mechanics, so we'll
encourage you to take a look a various
textbooks and other lectures online.
For example, these set of lectures
by Professor Michael Fowler
at the University of Virginia.
In those we will see a few
problems of following up on
this solution in your homework.
So you will have a chance to look
into this problem in more detail and
understand the solution at a deeper level.